Phasing out coal in the power sector by 2040 would allow SA to fulfil its commitment to the Paris Agreement goal of limiting warming to well below 2° C without significant impact on the economy. South Africa could have cheaper, cleaner and more reliable electricity supply and fulfil its commitment to the Paris Agreement goal of limiting warming if it transitions to renewable energy sooner rather than later. These are some of the main findings of a new SA-TIED study undertaken by the University of Cape Town’s (UCT) Energy Research Centre (ERC). SA-TIED is aunique collaboration between local and international research institutes and the government of South Africa. The ERC study is an alternative technical assessment of South Africa’s future electricity system to inform debate on the draft Integrated Resource Plan (IRP2019) which was recently presented by the Department of Energy to the National Economic Development and Labour Council (Nedlac). The IRP is government’s scenario planning for the country’s energy needs and is updated regularly to inform policy. Such debates are critical given the rolling electricity blackouts facing the country. The need for clean energy solutions has also been reinforced by the devastating impact of Cyclone Idai which struck parts of southern Africa. This tragedy once again highlights that any future economic and energy planning scenarios must account for climate change mitigation effort. The ERC assessment does this. The ERC study finds there is no single or quick-fix solution to South Africa’s electricity woes, but rather that a vibrant energy-mix be adopted, to not only save money for consumers, industry and the economy broadly, but also to meet the country’s carbon emission targets. Such a mix would include methods to store excess power on grid through utility-scale storage, and off-grid, for example by generating hydrogen, ammonia, and methane, and charging electric vehicles. Key Findings The study also weighs how much decarbonisation South Africa can and should do without putting the economy at risk. It argues the country should pursue rapid decarbonisation of the electricity sector – i.e. using less coal-powered stations – to avoid additional mitigation costs to the rest of the economy. It finds that phasing out coal in the power sector by 2040 is required for South Africa to fulfil its commitment to the Paris Agreement goal of limiting warming to well below 2° C and this is without significant impact on the economy, and therefore South Africa can afford to be more ambitious in its climate mitigation policy. One of the key critiques of the draft IRP, the study argues, is that it does not adequately address the central problem of climate change mitigation, even though the electricity sector currently accounts for more than 40% of South Africa’s emissions. The ERC assessment takes this into account and provides an economy-wide analysis. *Disclaimer: Please note the research or its outcomes are not policy positions of the South African government nor do they reflect the views of the partner organisations.