By Robert Perkins , Diana Kinch and James Burgess Indirect forms of resource nationalism, particularly in Africa, are on the rise, threatening the investment climate in some of the world’s biggest oil and mineral producing nations, according to global risk consultancy, Verisk Maplecroft. A total of 30 countries have witnessed a
significant increase in resource nationalism risks over the last year,
including 21 major producers of oil, gas and minerals, Verisk Maplecroft’s
latest Resource Nationalism Index shows. The country now most at risk is the
Democratic Republic of Congo, which has been downgraded by five places in the
rankings from a year ago to the highest globally alongside Venezuela. Regionally, Africa is also home to 10
countries experiencing a growth in resource risks, including Tanzania (third
highest risk), Zambia (17th) Gabon (23rd) and Equatorial Guinea (40th),
according to the study. The most common issues increasing risk in
countries include rising tax pressures, changing contractual terms and tougher
local content requirements, the consultancy believes. “The index shows host governments are
using such measures to wrestle revenues away from oil, gas and mining operators
across the continents,” the study concludes. Countries now rated “extreme
risk” by the study include: Venezuela and the DRC (joint highest risk
globally), Tanzania in third, Russia fourth, and North Korea and Zimbabwe joint
fifth, followed by Swaziland and Papua New Guinea. DRC RISK In the DRC — Africa’s top copper producer
and miner of more than half of the world’s cobalt — the risk profile rose
sharply following last year’s new mining code with onerous fiscal terms for
existing operators and increased scope for government intervention. “The government has attempted to
block commercial asset transfers; tried to usurp operators to glean more
profit; and choked exports from a cobalt mine,” the report notes.
“The future doesn’t seem too rosy despite a change in leader. The new
president (Felix Tshisekedi) will not present a vast departure from the status quo
for mining regulation.” Cobalt prices spiked to 10-year highs of
$95,250/mt in March 2018 as electric vehicle and other battery metals producers
rushed to secure supplies after the country classified cobalt as a strategic
metal, allowing it to hike royalties. Since then, prices have slumped, hitting a
one-year low of $31,000/mt this week, on the back of a surge in supplies from
small-scale producers and aggressive moves to reduce the amount of the metal in
EV batteries. The DRC, Africa’s second-biggest country,
produces only small amounts of oil and gas of around 25,000 boe/d. India (15th in the index), Malaysia
(30th), Turkey (36th), Iraq (42nd) and Mexico (68th) are among major producing
countries that have also seen their scores in the index fall. RUSSIA MINING THREAT Tanzania has also jumped up the list in
recent years, reflecting President John Magufuli’s self-declared “economic
warfare” launched against large-scale mining companies in 2017, the report
notes. Magufuli prohibited the export of unprocessed
copper and gold ores to boost the domestic smelting industry. He has also
insisted that IOCs develop onshore LNG infrastructure as part of his local
beneficiation drive, meaning onshore infrastructure is now harder to finance. Russia, the world’s largest energy producer, rose two places in the index from a year ago, reflecting a growing risk to the country’s mining sector from Russia’s “informal and unpredictable” political system, according to the report. Western sanctions are also concentrating power in state-run companies, and conflicts between Russia’s political leaders could drag in mining companies as the race to succeed Putin heats up, the report said. The risk of outright business expropriation is also rising in Russia as a result, as it is in Venezuela where President Nicolas Maduro’s socialist government attempts to cling on to power, despite widespread civil unrest and wide-ranging corruption. Read the original article published on SPGlobal