‘Providing opportunities and hope to the Bronkhorstspruit community.’ Black Royalty Minerals (BRM), a division of the Makole Group also an operator of Chilwavhusiku Colliery, has launched its Mining Academic Programme (MAP) in Bronkhorstspruit, the company announced through a statement. According to the company, the focus of this programme is to provide educational support to the local community, increasing the understanding of key subjects and assisting in broader poverty alleviation. In partnership with MINDSET, an educational technology and media NGO, BRM’s MAP provides a supplementary education platform that delivers academic support to 400 senior high school learners in Tshwane’s  seven municipality region . The company’s chief executive officer, Ndavhe Mareda, said: “MAP is one of the many ways in which BRM continually strives to make a difference to the lives of the number of historically disadvantaged learners. He added that BRM focuses on upliftment and enablement in the communities surrounding its colliery and from the areas where its sources labour and suppliers and places great importance on activities and initiatives which will show tangible benefits. “Using technology and qualified facilitators, learners will receive free, engaging and high-quality extra lessons in key subjects once a week.” The Minister of Mineral Resources, Honourable Gwede Mantashe and executives from his department were invited to the Chilwavhusiku Colliery for a discussion around the Mining Academic Programme and the positive impact that this will have on the community. He assessed the progress and milestones of the 100% black-owned coal mine since it commenced operating a year ago. Mantashe later joined the launch event for the MAP project where His Majesty Prince George Mahlangu, MEC of Education, Mr. Panyaza Lesufi and the executives from the Department of Education gathered to meet and talk to some of the students who will be part of the programme. “We are proud of how the community has embraced MAP and look forward to helping the students achieve their full potential. We will continue to support the community and expand on similar programmes,” concludes Mareda.