As concerns around energy security in South Africa grow, so does it for the rest of the continent, where access to energy plagues close to 1 billion people in Sub-Saharan Africa alone. It is therefore befitting that this year’s Windaba conference will bring together industry leaders, investors, power producers and pioneers to discuss ways in which wind power can be unleashed to address South Africa’s economic development and that of the countries north of our borders. Themed, ‘Unleashing
Renewable Power for African Economic Development’, this year’s event will
evaluate wind energy’s role in ensuring economic development and how releasing
the remaining constraints to growth can lead to greater social and economic
impacts. Recent data released by the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) shows that renewable energy capacity has grown in all regions of the world, emerging and developing economies included. Africa’s 8.4 percent growth put it in third place and it is no wonder that many South African wind power industry players are already au fait with the landscape. South Africa is a front runner in Sub-Saharan Africa when it comes to the wind industry and has much to gain from expanding its markets.  This would shore up the local manufacturing sector, thereby creating long-term sustainable employment opportunities. Furthermore, this will have the potential to contribute to the country’s green economy objectives and objectives of the National Development Plan, all of which hinge on a coordinated supportive policy environment that supports a smooth power procurement as part of the Renewable Energy Independent Power Producer Procurement Programme (REI4P). “With the promising development of the Integrated Resource Plant potentially leading to continuous smooth procurement, coupled with the potential capacity to expand and build a supply chain locally, South Africa is poised to serve the Sub-Sahara. Furthermore, South Africa has become a centre of competence for project development and is geared to spread beyond borders,” comment Janek Winand, Managing Director of Siemens Gamesa Renewable Energy in South Africa, who will be speaking at this year’s Windaba conference. “REI4P continues to be the most exciting wind energy opportunity globally. Many countries are looking to learn from SA’s experience and leapfrog to the next development level. It is the innovative technology that the African power sector needs,” comment Mercia Grimbeek, Chair of the South African Wind Energy Association (SAWEA). It is anticipated
that the next competitive auction for renewable energy in South Africa will be
announced by the second half of 2019, following a positive start to the year, which
saw government renewing its commitment to growing this sector as part of the
country’s sustainable energy mix. “2019 has kicked off
on a positive note for the renewable energy industry but, although the future
of wind energy looks bright, there is much that the industry collectively still
needs to achieve to consolidate its position and deliver on the many benefits
it promises economically, socially and environmentally. We believe that it is
within our grasp to secure the generation of affordable, sustainable and
reliable power in Africa,” concluded Grimbeek. WINDABA The 9th annual
Windaba Conference and Exhibition will take place on 8-9 October 2019 in Cape
Town, at the CTICC.  This year, for the
first time, Windaba will expand its focus to include the whole of Sub-Saharan
Africa and will be looking to share the lessons that South Africa has gained
from its world-renowned REI4P with the broader
continent. WHAT the world bank sayS about Energy
Security in Africa: 