Bryant Ward, the Executive Vice President of Engineering at Liebherr Mining Equipment Newport News, Virginia, fields questions from African Mining Brief on the merits of having vehicle fire suppression systems factory-installed and intricacies involved in the process of installation. AMB: From Liebherr’s perspective, what are the advantages of using a factory-installed fire suppression system in a vehicle over self-installation (where a mining company engages a fire suppression company to do the installation instead)? BW:
Fire suppression companies cannot always know the best places to weld, and may
unintentionally compromise structural integrity of the mining truck.
Factory-fitted solutions result in a better quality of fit and finish,
reliability, and safer placement in regards to fuel and ignition sources. Liebherr supports
customers in selecting and deciding how to safely install fire suppression
systems on Liebherr mining trucks. Liebherr relies on fire
suppression subject matter experts to provide the required information about the
latest fire suppression agents and suppression technologies. Liebherr offers
automatic fire suppression on the T 264 and T 284 mining trucks, because
operator and personnel safety is of paramount importance. AMB: What are the key factors you consider prior to
installing a fire suppression system in a vehicle? BW:
Two factors that are most critical when it comes to fire suppression are fuel
and ignition sources. Each truck differs by size, class and manufacturer. Twin agent fire
suppression is widely considered to be the safest option. A dry chemical
extinguishes flames, but fuel and heat from the vehicle can always reignite it.
To prevent this short coming re-ignition, a wet chemical foam agent suffocates
the potential fire and cools the ignition source. AMB: What role does a company supplying a fire
suppression system play in the design of a vehicle? BW:
Liebherr covers exhaust pipes with fire and oil resistant wrapping where there
are risks for fire ignition.We take measures to keep temperatures lower
than the ignition point or segregate areas of fuel and ignitions sources with
shielding, wrapping, or in design. The fire suppression
suppliers have limited input on the design of a vehicle, so Liebherr engineers
create as many safety opportunities as possible in the design of the haul
trucks. It is a close collaboration on compiling and reviewing risk assessments
with fire suppression suppliers. AMB: Would you share with us special features of
standard vehicle fire suppression systems and how they enhance safety? BW:
Most everyone agrees on the twin agent method of fire suppression, many differ
on the type of automatic detection used to initiate the system. Different
methods of activation include: Ultimately, the correct solution for any given customer depends on the customer’s safety needs. Following the principles of a risk assessment, customers can mitigate a high-risk location with a more advanced detection solution, or even a combination of available detection methods.