Mining group agrees to walk away from Simandou project, with all legal actions ceasing By Simon Goodley The
mining group controlled by the controversial tycoon Beny Steinmetz is to walk
away from a massive iron ore project in Guinea as part of an
agreement that settles a long-running corruption dispute with the west African
nation. Development of Simandou – one of the world’s biggest iron deposits, containing billions of tonnes of high-grade ore – has been hindered by years of legal wrangling as well as the enormous cost of the required infrastructure, estimated at more than $20bn (£15bn). Guinea
had levelled corruption allegations at Steinmetz’s BSG
Resources (BSGR) and stripped the company of its rights to the
Simandou blocks and the smaller Zogota concession. BSGR denied any wrongdoing
and responded by filing a notice of dispute at the International
Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes. On
Monday, BSGR said it would drop its claim on Simandou after reaching an
agreement with the Guinea government in which the two parties will withdraw
outstanding actions related to the dispute. The agreement, if implemented,
should remove one obstacle to the mine being developed and is expected also to
allow investment in the separate Zogota iron ore deposit nearby, in which BSGR
remains interested. In
a statement, BSGR said: “Following this agreement, BSGR relinquishes its claims
on blocks 1 and 2 of Simandou and both parties waive all outstanding
procedures.” Steinmetz
and BSGR have attracted their fair share of controversy over the past five
years. Having seen BSGR stripped of its Guinea mining rights is 2014,
Steinmetz was arrested in his home
country of Israel in 2016 over
claims that he arranged for bribes to be paid to gain access to Simandou. Steinmetz
has denied any wrongdoing. A company spokesman said he did not know if the
Israel investigation is ongoing. BSGR,
which voluntarily entered administration last year to
protect itself from legal disputes related to a project in Guinea, also
indicated that it hopes to be involved in efforts by new investors to develop
the Zogota iron ore deposit in the near future. It refused to comment on
whether any future involvement at the Zogota site was part of the settlement
agreement or if the company would now come out of administration. Rival
mining firms are also showing an interest in investing in Zogota, possibly as
part of a deal involving BSGR. One
of them is Niron Metals, which is headed by Sir Mick Davis, chief executive of the Conservative party and
the former boss of the mining group Xstrata. A
spokesman for Niron said: “The announcement that Guinea and BSRG have agreed to
settle their legal claims has paved the way for the creation of an effective
mining partnership between Niron and the government to mine this deposit. The
company looks forward to bringing this to fruition subject the satisfactory
settlement of all disputes between the parties.” Guinea’s mines minister, Abdoulaye Magassouba, told Reuters: “We are pleased there’s been an amicable resolution of the dispute with BSGR, particularly since Guinea will recuperate the world-class deposit of Simandou’s blocks 1 and 2.” Read the original article published on The Guardian