Mines in South Africa, which has the world’s biggest reserves of platinum and chrome, are seen as a benefit by only 13% of people who live in their proximity, a report on the industry’s social impact said. Four out of five people see no positive impact at all and 8% said
mines brought “sickness, dispossessions and damages,” ActionAid said in a
report released Tuesday. South Africa’s economy during apartheid was built on mining and
the exploitation of cheap black labor, and the sector, the world’s
fifth-biggest, still accounts for about half the nation’s exports. Mining
communities often complain about people being pushed off their land, pollution
and the violence and sexually transmitted diseases associated with the influx
of migrant workers. People who live close to mines “have remained largely excluded
from participating in the development of policies and legislation that directly
affects them,” ActionAid said. The advocacy group based the report on surveys
of communities near mines owned by Anglo American, Exxaro Resources and Harmony
Gold, among others, in seven of South Africa’s nine provinces. The government took R205 billion in tax and royalties from mining
companies in the 10 years to 2018, ActionAid said, citing a PwC report. That
represents 24% of “value” generated by the companies, while employees took 47%
and shareholders 29%. Communities received only R7.5 billion, or 0.9% of the
value. Gender-Based Violence While deriving few benefits in the form of employment or
infrastructure improvements, communities said they have to instead contend with
increased violence. “Strong links were drawn between the influx of men into the
community looking for employment and the rapid rise in gender-based violence,”
ActionAid said in the report. “This is prevalent in the form of rape, murder
and abuse.” Other negative impacts reported by communities include damage to
housing from blasting at the mines, dust, noise and water pollution and the
resultant death of livestock. The prevalence of diseases such as HIV,
tuberculosis, silicosis and cancer were also seen to have risen in some cases. While mines are by law required to have a Social and Labour Plan
and communities are supposed to be aware of it, 91% of 690 respondents in the
report said they were unaware of the contents of the plans of the mines in
their areas. “The approach to mining in South Africa has been a violent,
masculine and exploitative project to concentrate benefits for a few at the
expense of a majority,” ActionAid said. “The potential wealth in mining has had a significant influence over the political arrangements of South Africa, and has historically been the main driver underpinning the apartheid economic model of wealth accumulation.” Read the original article published on fin24