By Marc Ramsay The distinct transition from early to widespread adoption of digitalisation in the mining industry was an interesting development between last year and this year’s Mining Indaba. There was clear focus on digitalisation in everyone’s presentations, across all technologies, which highlighted the growing trend of digital disruption in the sector, from smaller companies to major conglomerates. ‘Smart
mining’ is happening – in South Africa, Africa and globally – and its effects are
having a positive impact on a range of sectors within the mines, extending to
neighbouring communities. The
reality is that technology is contributing to an evolution within the mining
industry. It’s a far cry from where it was two or three decades ago when
barriers to entry were huge, and today smaller mining companies are burgeoning.
Digitalisation has developed to the stage where it is widely accessible – both
in terms of cost and ease of use. In the past, in general, mining machinery was
advanced and complex to operate, but the newer range of technology is ‘plug and
play’, such as our platform, which is IoT enabled and features open and
inter-operable architecture and delivers real-time control and operational
efficiency. These technologies don’t require major qualifications to deploy,
and they are enabling the smaller miner to play a larger role in the mining
industry, certainly in South Africa. Technology
is bringing in remarkable energy efficiencies in a wide range of areas – with
IoT providing far greater access to data. Energy cannot be harvested once used
and the more efficiencies incorporated into processes through technology, the
greater the savings. For example, in the past, to produce 1oz of gold a certain
number of kW hours of electricity were used. The biggest consumer of
electricity is in the grinding of rocks or substrate, with a correlation
between rock hardness and usage of energy. Now, through the use of cost-effective
sensor technology, the parameters on crushers can be adjusted to work as hard
as they need to according to the substrate being crushed. It’s smarter mining at
work – and in Africa we are seeing efforts to squeeze every opportunity to
improve the efficiency of resources. Exciting
developments too, are evident in both augmented reality and virtual reality in
the industry – adding vastly to the safety of individuals on mines and
improving efficiencies, allowing IoT enabled communication with cell phones and
tablets with the open standards technology in the case of augmented reality, alerting
staff and contractors to potential hazards, or, in the case of virtual reality,
enabling interaction with mining technology from the safety of a control room
with a VR enabled device, such as Oculus Rift or Holonens devices. We have
applications of this type in South Africa, in mining, utilities and water. The
Indaba also highlighted the increased emphasis on water management in mines, which
was not restricted to consumption, but the overall direct impact that mines
have on the supply and quality of the water in local communities and on the
immediate eco-systems. Of significant interest is that Anglo American has
incorporated water usage as one of their key performance indicators – which is
the first mining company we’ve been involved with that has placed water at such
a high level, but it is a clear barometer of the growing value of water usage
in mining worldwide. Here
too, the management, measurement and control of water is through technology and
digitalisation – where flows and consumption points can be accurately monitored
and measured, and sustainability strategies implemented to ensure minimal
impact on the community and environment. Training
and skills development is another key focus area in mining, and increasingly,
products in the technology sector are being developed that are simpler to
implement in a plug and play fashion. To play its part even further, Schneider Electric
South Africa is proud of its online free-to-all Energy University, which offers
training and certification in a wide range of comprehensive courses in
electrical energy, which are aligned to local skills development needs, and
fills in a vital gap between unskilled labour and graduates. There has also been a gratifying upsurge by mines in social development and upliftment initiatives in the areas where they operate, recognising the value of the communities that host their operations. Schneider Electric SA has also collaborated with mines in a number of investment programmes that have directly benefited the communities. At a large open pit mine in Limpopo, we have collaborated in an enterprise development project, SESA invested in solar street lighting for the local neighbourhood, and at another mine we have invested in solar powered pumping systems to pump water up from the local stream to feed the local bakery and the farming community. It is extremely rewarding to see lives affected so directly from our involvement. Schneider’s ethos will always be that access to energy is a basic human right. By Marc Ramsay, Vice President of the Anglophone Africa Mining, Metals and Minerals Industry Business Unit at Schneider Electric SA