Transportation Components, a recognised leader in the distribution of
Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM) components to the aftermarket, has taken the
quantum leap to a whole new level, with its recent appointment as the supplier
of Duroline brake linings to the well-known OEM Henred Fruehauf, the largest
trailer and allied products manufacturer in South Africa. Henred Fruehauf
are using the Duroline brake linings supplied by Transportation Components in
the foundation brakes of the trailers they manufacture. This has not only signified the return of a valued
customer. It also means that Transportation Components is not only supplying to the aftermarket – but to an OEM as well. “We really appreciate the trust Henred Fruehauf is placing in us again:
not only by depending on us for the all-important brake linings which will be
used in the manufacture of their trailer axles; but as a well-known OEM making
use of our OEM components in turn. This really demonstrates recognition for our quality products and
excellent service; and furthermore places us in a different league, completing
the circle of quality, safety and consistency from our perspective,” says Dave
Jenkins, Managing Director of Transportation Components. Consistency is one of the main issues in road transport – from
manufacture to maintenance – to ensure safe, reliable and cost-effective
operation, made possible by the use of OEM components. Transportation
Components provides this consistency with components such as the safe, reliable
and cost-effective Duroline brake linings. Duroline is
recognised worldwide as one of the largest manufacturers of friction material and
uses state-of-the-art technology to produce brake linings for medium and heavy
duty vehicles. The
company is known for supplying brake linings which offer superior performance and durability. “The return of Henred Fruehauf to our customer
base is an endorsement for our principal Duroline; but also for Transportation
Components’ commitment to South Africa’s heavy
transportation sector by consistently supplying quality products from Brazil
and Turkey. We not only provide quality components to the aftermarket – and now also
to a well-known OEM – but also safety and peace of mind,” Patrick Bruinette, National Sales Manager of
Transportation Components, explains. The
braking system is one of the most critical parts of any truck and trailer
combination because the sheer weight of a truck and trailer magnifies the
consequences of an accident, which is why heavy vehicle accidents are often
blamed on a faulty braking system. Bruinette points out that is the reason why regular,
scheduled maintenance and the use of quality components are crucial. Transportation Components had
samples of its brake lining friction material tested to determine a baseline
for the durability of various friction materials. “Our OEM Duroline brake lining,
which are the ‘gold standard’ in the industry, were proven to be from 30 to 50
percent more durable,” Bruinette says. Transportation Components puts a
lot of effort into educating stakeholders in the transportation industry about
the fact that brake friction material can vary in quality. The company also endeavours
to reduce the cost-per-kilometre for heavy-vehicle operators by supplying top
quality aftermarket parts. According to Bruinette, trailer
brakes must be maintained according to the specifications on the brake data
plate. “The trailer is carrying the actual load and its brake system comprises
of at least 50 percent of the complete vehicle combination braking system. That
is why it is so important for Henred Fruehauf to use our Duroline brake linings.” Jenkins explains that Transportation
Components prides itself on offering the best quality OEM components, which
meet international criteria for safety, quality and environmental standards as
well as innovation. “We have a proud record of twenty
years as a trusted provider of OEM aftermarket solutions, and as a trusted
contributor to the South African transportation sector, we are ready to once
again offer Henred Fruehauf as an OEM itself, quality products which will
ensure product satisfaction for its customers in turn. We are also very proud of the
recognition and kudos which having such a well-known OEM customer confers on
Transportation Components. This really represents an important and significant quantum
leap for us as a company,” Jenkins concludes.