WWAT allows operators to receive instant notification of any sensor or equipment events. Control of maintenance personnel can automatically be informed about the problem and plan effectively for the corrective task. Small wonder, it has become a reference for sound water management in mines. It is hard to imagine how mines, typically located in remote sites, would cope without Wireless Wide Area Telemetry (WWAT), considering that they are under increased pressure to manage water in their operations better. Regulators – in South Africa’s case, the Department of Mineral Resources – have become more stringent on how excess and wastewater is managed. Coupled with this is the need to manage water for their consumption and production requirements better. Consequently, there is no doubt that, through facilitating wireless communication between Remote Telemetry Unit (RTU) and Supervisory Control And Data Acquisition Systems (SCADA), significantly, WWAT has alleviated this burden for operators. The
reference point for sound water management In an interview with African Mining Brief, Johan Hoolsema, the managing director of Expert System Solutions, calls WWAT the reference point for sound water management. A supplier of WWAT solutions, ESS has installed integrated telemetry solutions for mining operations as well as other industries in Southern Africa and witnessed the changes it brought to water management. Underlining the relevance of WWAT, Hoolsema
says, “WWAT allows operators to receive instant notification of any sensor or
equipment events. Control of maintenance personnel can automatically be
informed about the problem and plan effectively for the corrective task.
Additionally, remote site monitoring and control can be enabled via the internet
with a secure password log-in facility for easy configuration and management.” What
WWAT brings? Based on feedback from
clients, Hoolsema highlights key areas where telemetry has changed the game in
water management – hitherto an exercise that has been a drag and drain on a
mine’s overstrained resources. Particularly, he singles out preventative
maintenance, operational savings, improved planning, better water quality
monitoring and level monitoring, as well as reduced insurance premiums and
safety risks. “The user can monitor
and control RTUs remotely, thereby reducing call outs to site and enabling the
maintenance team to prepare in the event that a call out does become necessary.
The early warning of sudden changes (by means of water leak detection and early
fault detection) will inform maintenance staff before problems escalate. This
decreases the occurrence of electricity and water supply disruptions. Any
discrepancy in water volume and pressure that goes in and out would indicate a possible pipeline
leakage, elaborates Hoolsema. Through facilitating preventative
maintenance of plants, reducing water and electricity outages, telemetry can
bring significant operational costs savings. When a plant is in a good
condition, there is optimal water supply for various processes.  Hence, equipped with WWAT equipment, operators
can be able to know whether the level is falling so that refilling can be
scheduled, says Hoolsema. Through telemetry, the
level of the quality of water for consumption and production in mines can be
monitored for PH, level of chlorine amongst others. Furthermore, as part of
the terms of their operating licences, mines are obliged to manage waste and
excess water soundly.   Through telemetry, the level of water in dams can
be monitored. WWAT helps mines reduce
to risk insurance and safety risks, as well as through control of water loss. Key
factors in design Without a doubt,
telemetry brings incredible benefits when used in water management. However, it
is worth noting that every mine site has unique conditions, Hoolsema points out.
In general, he stresses, key factors that are considered in the design of a WWAT
include: environmental conditions and phenomena (such as severe lightning), the
shortage of skilled personnel to operate the equipment and frustrations arising
from the vulnerability of cable systems (aging, cable theft, damage and
lightning).” He continues,” At the
end of the day, while this may sound like a cliché, ease of maintenance,
reliability, simplicity of operation and cost effectiveness are key in a WWAT.” The ESS-RTU ESS’s WWAT tool, the ESS-RTU (Remote Terminal
Unit), enables authentication and acknowledgements at every level of the
monitor and control process. It ensures robust data integrity between RTU’s and
the Monitoring and
Control Software Platform. In addition, various
remote analog and digital sensors can be used with a choice of different
communication technologies such as MPT1327, DMR, TETRA, LAN, WiFi, GSM and LTE. The ESS-RTU also provides
interfacing to controllers using bus-protocols (e.g. Modbus, DNP-3, OPC). The ESS-RTU allows for
exceptional flexibility and modularity with the ability to provide 100%
redundancy for critical management. The ESS-RTU is a proudly South African designed and
manufactured product used extensively in the South African market as well as
abroad. For more information on ESS products refer to http://www.e-s-s.co.za