DRA
Global (“DRA”) has been awarded the contract for Basic Engineering services on
the Kakula Mine portion of the greater Kamoa-Kakula Project. The Kamoa-Kakula
deposit is the world’s largest high grade, copper-only deposit, located in the
Democratic Republic of Congo. Kamoa Copper SA, a
joint venture between Ivanhoe Mines, Zijin Mining Group Co, Ltd. and the
Government of the Democratic Republic of Congo, will develop the new Copper Mine which will
yield an estimated 6 Mtpa in its first phase alone. The Kakula deposit has been independently
ranked as the world’s largest, undeveloped, high yield, high-grade copper
discovery. Kakula resource is
estimated at 174 million tons at a grade of 5.62% copper. DRA’s project delivery relationship with Ivanhoe Mines started on
the high-grade platinum-group metals, nickel and copper Platreef Project
in South Africa. It was on this project that DRA demonstrated its  experienced capability in project delivery
which proved to be a key differentiator for the organisation on Kakula. DRA was contracted to complete the Pre-Feasibility Study (PFS),
for Kamoa Copper SA, in 2017. In October 2018, DRA was further awarded the
contract to deliver a complete Basic Engineering package. The contract scope
includes the Basic Engineering and design associated with all underground
mining infrastructure, the concentrator plant and all supporting surface
infrastructure. Work began in October 2018 and is estimated to conclude by mid-2019. In addition to the Basic Engineering, DRA offers continued support
on the early works, which includes equipping the main declines with dewatering
and conveyor systems, ventilation shafts and associated surface infrastructure. Alistair Hodgkinson, DRA Executive Vice President, Projects, has
credited winning the entire Basic Engineering contract to the teams’ hard work,
commitment, flexible solutions, and client relationships. “The team working on
this project has gone above and beyond to meet deadlines and exceed client
expectations ultimately to ensure that this signature project starts producing
as soon as possible. The DRA team overcome all challenges head-on and worked in
collaboration to find flexible solutions that add value to the project,”
concludes Hodgkinson.