Diesel engines require clean diesel, free of water and
contamination. While old generation engines were tolerant to bad fuel, fuel
injection systems on new generation engines are extremely sensitive to fuel
quality. Water contamination must be fully removed and diesel shall be
protected from degradation for sustainable engine performance, emission compliance
and long life of aggregates. Conventional spin-on type filtration systems supplied with OEs are designed to work efficiently on diesel complying with ASTM standard. In most cases these are tested on reference grade fuel, which is usually assayed for its purity and dissolved water content. In reality, this quality of fuel is hard to find in fleet operating environment. Therefore standard filtration systems will either do not work efficiently or fail to protect vital fuel system components and engine. This difference in performance of filtration systems is
known to all in the industry. Had standard filtration systems worked efficiently
in the field, there would be no fuel related operational problems. But in
reality this is not the case. Greater understanding of the problem affecting
fuel quality is essential for appreciating the solution. Incomplete combustion leads to fuel wastage When the combustion is not complete, diesel wastage is increased, meaning more fuel is burned or consumed for generating the required power. This is a universal problem, for which the only solution is for the customer to become pro active. Educating the customer on the problems of filtration and protection of diesel is an absolute must if they should get the desired and rated performance from their engines. Getting to know the problem Engine makers and fuel suppliers will not take the
responsibility on operational problems arising from poor quality fuel. Fuel
suppliers’ responsibility ends when the fuel is sold to the customer. But the problem of contamination is something, which takes place in the tank. Engine makers are clear on their stand when they test and publish their engine’s performance data based on good quality fuel meeting with the standard. This means, if the engine performance is not as per the makers recommended levels and premature component failures occur owing to poor quality fuel, engine makers will not own up the responsibility in normal cases. This leaves the customer and the service personnel in a difficult situation leading to protracted claims, arguments and sometimes customers shying away from trusted brands assuming that the failures are caused by poor workmanship and materials of components used. It is with this reality in mind that we should approach the problem and look for a Filter Element of Engine not protected with Ecotech Fuelmag reliable solution. The Problem – major factors affecting diesel quality– 1. Adulteration 2. Dissolved and free water 3. Suspended particulates, and 4. Bio degradation Since conventional filters render inadequate to deal with
all the problems affecting diesel quality, need for a reliable pre filtration
and conditioning system assumes significance. Dealing with the problem 1. Manmade adulteration could be dealt with enactment of law 2. Water could be totally removed with a high efficiency
water separator 3. Particulates could be filtered using appropriate fine
filters provided by engine makers. 4. Bio degradation is a natural phenomenon caused by numerous microbes thriving in diesel tank using the carbon molecules of diesel for its survival and proliferation. Conventional filtration technique will not prevent microbial activity in diesel. Hence a different approach to solution is required. Microbial contamination and bio degradation of diesel Bio degradation of diesel is a natural phenomenon taking
place in diesel tanks, which we do not see. Diesel tanks, through its breather,
always draw moisture laden air and airborne microbes into the diesel. With the
presence of moisture and free water in diesel, these microbes multiply in
diesel tank using the carbon molecules of diesel as its food. Temperate climatic condition prevailing in India acts as a
catalyst to this process, technically referred to as bio degradation. When diesel
is degraded biologically by microbes, it becomes unfit for the engine’s
consumption or we say, the diesel becomes off spec. When the diesel is contaminated with bio degradation, the
quality and chemical characteristics of diesel is altered. Diesel becomes more acidic as a result of microbes oxidising
the carbon molecules for its food requirements. This oxidation process
introduces acidic substances in diesel including bio surfactants. Bio surfactants helps diesel to emulsify with water and
carries the water to engine through fuel pump and injectors. Water molecules entrapped in diesel becomes highly abrasive
under high pressure created by fuel pumps and cause erosion to fuel pump and
injector components. Bio degradation will also reduce the natural lubricity of
diesel. As you are aware, modern fuel pumps use diesel for lubricating its
internal components built to very tight tolerance. This reduced lubricity of
diesel is a major cause of fuel injection pump and injector failures. However owing to operational requirements, cost
considerations and lack of awareness of bio degradation, many customers do not
have the resources for testing the quality of diesel periodically. As a result, contamination and bio degradation process
remains unchecked causing several operational problems to engine and eventually
affects fleet reliability and profitability. Adverse effects of microbial activity in diesel Oxidation promotes formation of Asphaltene (large lumps of
black sticky substance) causes filter clogging. Black slimy filter media is an
indication of oxidation of fuel. Bio surfactants help diesel and water to emulsify. Filters
present in engine’s fuel lines will not separate/remove water from diesel water
emulsion. Water and corrosive acids reduces diesel’s natural lubricity causing
premature wear and tear of fuel injection pump and injectors. Water, owing to its surface tension and specific gravity
difference displaces diesel from wear components and accelerate wear and tear
of precision components of fuel injection system. Degradation leads to contamination and reduced calorific
value. Diesel affected with microbial activity will be cloudy and at times
discolored. Operational problems Control measures to deal with microbial contamination and degradation 1. Enhanced house keeping 2. Frequent testing of diesel from storage tanks and
engine’s tanks 3. Treating diesel with biocides 4. On line protection Analysis of control measures Though this will minimise the incidence, it requires high
investment in terms of equipment and personnel and therefore not an assured way
to deal with the problem. 2 Testing diesel frequently for presence of microbes. 3. Treating affected diesel in the tank involves precise
dosage of biocides. Once treated the entire volume of diesel should be filtered
to remove all slime and sediments. Biocide treated diesel should not be mixed with other
batches of diesel as it would dilute the strength of biocide and aggravate the
problem Since there are practical difficulties associated with this procedure,
it is not a viable solution 4. Online protection – Flow through diesel conditioner
installed in the diesel suction line after the tank and before existing primary
filters and fuel transfer pump. This system ensures continuous cleaning and conditioning
of diesel by destroying microbial colonies. Since it is installed in the fuel
suction line, it cleans and protects the entire diesel volume in the tank making
use return fuel flow from Fuel pump and injectors. This is a permanent system with no recurring expenses and
intervention with a service life expectancy in excess of 20 years. Online diesel decontaminating system Ecotech Fuelmag diesel decontaminating unit is a flow
through diesel conditioner. As the fuel passes through the unit, the microbial colonies
get severely disrupted and broken down to original plasmolised cell size of
less than a micron. These cells pass through the fuel filter and burn up in the
combustion chamber. The fuel returning to the tank will contain bacteria but
will be in dormant state unable to multiply. This continuous process will keep
the diesel from getting contaminated and degraded. Since microbial activity is totally controlled in the fuel
system itself, the risk of contamination and by products is totally eliminated. Benefits of Ecotech Fuelmag Water contamination Water in diesel is referred to as “water bomb”. The damage
water could cause to fuel injection systems and engine is well known to the
industry. Even a tiny water droplet is sufficient to cause injector damage if
it reached the combustion zone. Though water separators are available dime a
dozen, for total water removal a high efficiency water separator is absolutely
necessary. Most common water separators are either gravity type, spin on type
with a water absorbing media. The spin on types have an efficiency of about
95%. This means, 5% of water could still find its way to FIP and engine causing
operational problems. Water being heavier and also owing to its surface tension
difference, displaces diesel from wear components of FIP and injectors,
promoting accelerated wear, and cavitation damages, greatly reducing the effective
service life of FIP and injectors. The cumulative losses from premature wear
and tear is a critical issue many operators face today with rotary pumps and
common rail pumps. The answer to this problem is a high efficiency water
separator and pre-filtration system that effectively removes water and
particulates up to 30 microns from diesel. This will in turn reduces the load on
OE fitted essential secondary filters and help them to work efficiently without
causing fuel restriction. Without a high efficiency pre-filtration system, the
standard filters come with engine must work hard to remove all the contaminants.
Secondary filters on most engines are fine filters with small pores of 5 micron
or less. Therefore its efficiency and service life depends on the quality of
diesel. It is in this context that one should look at an effective pre
filtration system. Low restriction pre filter reduces overall pressure drop in
the fuel system and helps improve the life and efficiency of secondary filters
and FIP. Aeration Damage Most common problem of bio degradation is premature filter
clogging, fuel injection pump malfunction or failure, injector malfunction or
failure resulting in incomplete combustion. The problem with clogged filter is
not as simple as commonly thought and it will not end with a usual replacement.
When the filter is clogged, it creates a restriction in the fuel system causing
the fuel pump to work with increased suction force; this high suction force
causes tiny air bubbles to form. Air bubbles so formed become highly abrasive
under pressure and causes irreparable damages to fuel injection pump and injectors. Both Ecotech Fuelmag and SEPAR diesel water separator will
help solve this problem thought to be impossible to solve. Both units are
independent and work differently for protecting diesel. These can be used in combination or independently as the
situation warrants. Based in informed opinion and field experience, both units
installed in combination offer ideal protection of diesel engines against
unpredictable fuel problems. Clean, contamination free diesel would help reduce fuel injection system break down and enhance combustion.Enhanced combustion will reduce smoke and minimize wastage of fuel. ( For more information on Ecotech, Fuelmag and SEPAR 2000 , visit thewebsite www.ecotecindia.com. It has agraphical product demo to help understand  its function or email pgt@ecotecindia.com)