A range of industries are now
benefiting from the versatility and speed of E-houses, according to medium to
heavy engineering specialist and solutions provider, Parnis Manufacturing. “While the E-house is not a new concept, customers are realising the value of giving an experienced company like Parnis Manufacturing the overall responsibility of project managing the full scope of their specific solution,” says Mario Guerini, chief operating officer at Parnis Manufacturing. With its established skills base and fit-for-purpose machinery, the company has been serving industry for over 45 years. A recent contract saw the fast-tracked production of a 13 metre by 4 metre E-house, from design through to delivery, in just three months. Working to stringent quality standards and under close supervision, Parnis Manufacturing was able to take the structure through various testing processes before being signed off by a registered professional engineer. E-houses of up to 22 metres in length can be constructed and are limited only by the logistics of road transportation. “We combine our experience in different
disciplines such as mechanical and electrical engineering, with our project management
expertise and advanced fabrication facilities,” says Guerini. “Typical
applications for E-houses today range from backup energy solutions and data
centres, to hydraulic power packs and motor control centres.” Among the strategies that Parnis
Manufacturing has fine-tuned to benefit the customer are its high-quality wall
panels. These are designed to be interchangeable in the walls and roof, making
it simpler to allow access for equipment. “Walls can be removed even after
assembly to create space to move equipment in and out, and to allow more than
one team to access the space at the same time,” he says. “This innovative
approach also greatly shortens the time required to fully commission the
units.” The bolting of panels also allows for
quick and accurate assembly, as this reduces welding to a minimum. Tolerances
as low as 3 mm can be achieved. The panels can also be surfaced and painted prior
to joining, thereby also reducing handling costs. “The way we approach our modular design means that we can accommodate late changes to the structure without unduly affecting the build programme,” he says. “The pace at which an E-house can be constructed is a major advantage if a customer is trying to meet tight project deadlines on site.” Guerini emphasises the importance of his well-trained and experienced foremen and workshop managers, adding to both the quality and high local content of the final result.